Algorithmic exercises


M
1.Stand up in front of the back of your chair.
2.Put your hands on the backrest.
3.Rise up on your toes and keep the pose for 3 seconds.
4.Then release.
5.Try to adjust your breathing while doing the pose: inhale when rising on your toes, exhale when releasing.

L

1. Stand up, lift your arms toward the roof
2. Fold your upper body downwards, try to reach the floor with your hands
3. Draw as large as possible vertical circle with your upper body, 3 times
4. Change direction, continue 3 times

A

1.Sit tall.
2.Drop your chin toward your chest.
3.Lift your arms straight forward to your shouder height.
4.Round your upper back.
5.Push your arms forward.
6.Hold for 10 seconds.
7.Lift your head.
8.Drop your arms down to your side.
9.Bend your elbows and pull them back.
10.Squeeze your shoulder blades together.
11.Hold for 10 seconds.
12.Repeat.


L

1.Sit with your back straight and shoulders back
2.Turn your head to the right
3.Turn your head to the left
4.Repeat 2. and 3.
5.Turn your head up
6.Turn your head down
7.Repeat 5. and 6.
8.Place your right hand on your right shoulder
9.Draw circles with your right elbow
10.Place your left hand on your left shoulder
11.Draw circles with your left elbow


E

Stand up - take steps away from your work desk - stand firmly on your two feet - start slowly bending your upper body, head first, towards the floor - continue reaching the floor as far as you can - relax your knees, neck, hands and shoulders - slowly swing your upper body from left to right, right to left - stay in the position for 5 seconds - slowly start to lift your upper body towards your standing position one vertebra at a time - take your standing position and a good posture – finish


X

Stand up, 
Find a platform that is slightly lower than the half point of your body,
Face it in front of you
Put your the heel of one foot straight on it while the tiptoe of another foot is pointed towards front as well
Slightly bend your upper body towards front, for 60 secs. 
Then alternate another leg, repeating. 


